---
layout: post
lang: en
tags: technical python
title: Life changers in Python
---

When programming is part of your daily routine comes the choice of a preferred
programming language. I have been practicing several common languages and
paradigms in my professional life, and finally converged to Python. I am used to
facing disapproval from people from the real-time programming or model checking
communities: semantics is flawed, typing is inexistant and performance is poor. 

I would argue that Python is well equipped to bypass these prejudices, and
unites the strength from many worlds. Python is slow and error-prone if you
don't know have a proper programming background. Python is not the best
languages to learn about programming, but a pleasure to work with once you went
through other languages.

Third-party libraries developed by the community bring performance and safety to
the language. They provide ease of use and a new way to think about programming.
I would call them *life changers*.

- **numpy** brings the performance from C arrays to Python. Avoid indexing at
  all cost and then Python is not slow anymore. If you can't avoid indexing,
  consider **Cython**: add typing annotations and compile your code to native C
  code. Yet for most cases, **numba** infers the type itself and compiles Python
  methods just in time;

- **pandas** ports data frames from R to Python. The learning curve is quite
  steep at first, but once you get to master **method chaining**, you get new
  ideas about comfort in programming;

- **altair** is a recent declarative framework for data visualisation. They
  bring a **grammar of graphics** to Python, and translate descriptions for the
  Javascript Vega framework. I consider it one of the most promising alternative
  to matplotlib, the library I enjoy criticising the most for their arguably
  poor API choices;

- **pytorch** also provides a clean object-oriented interface for Machine
  Learning and artificial neural network. **requests** wraps up the poor
  behaviour of the built-in urllib library for networking interactions and
  provides an intuitive API instead;

- last but not least, **mypy** parses type annotations attached to variables and
  functions and checks consistency in your code. The true power of typing in
  Python is comes from this "add type annotations when you are ready" paradigm.
  You may write code without any type annotations. You may annotate only part of
  the code and run code which is not properly typed. This is probably an heresy
  for skilled OCaml programmers but I find it efficient and pragmatic instead:
  your first shot at writing code probably works in most cases when you are
  ready to share it. Adding type annotations helps identifying tricky corner
  cases but does not hamper the execution of the code.

Of course, all these libraries are precious for the functionalities they
provide. Yet there is more than just that functionalities. Were it just about
API and services, these libraries will soon end up being **irrelevant, replaced
by better tools yet to be written**. However, they become truly powerful and
elegant when we look more in depth into the choices that were made to design
them.

JIT compilation, method chaining, grammar of graphics, functional programming,
and soft typing are (among others) powerful concepts to study, remember,
practice and leverage, when writing your own programs. Blindly translating
Matlab scripts or code originally designed for another language only brings
frustration without brushing up any programming skill.


 
